## 1. Evidence evaluation

## EST evidence
FL-cDNAs and cDNAs are high quality evidence while RNAseq transcriptome could be characterized by misassemblies and high redundancy.      

The evidences can be filtered by: 
- Completeness (presence of start and stop codons)
- Length (1Kb is a suitable threshold)
and RNAseq needs further filtering for redundancy.

Use [Evidential Gene](http://arthropods.eugenes.org/EvidentialGene/evigene/) for polishing and refinement of the RNAseq data set. Command line in the ```src``` directory.
Observations:
- Evidential Gene does not allow transcripts with the same name. In case you are merging several datasets, you need to rename the each sample in order to avoid same fasta labelling. This can be achieved through bash scripting more easily (add prefix to the transcript label based on the sample name for example).            
- Pool as many as possible RNAseq data sets. The author of Evidential gene suggests to combine different assemblers and data together to create a high quality reference.        

Evidential Gene creates 2 output directories - okayset and dropset. The dropset may also contain valid transcripts but it's mainly redundant and transripts which does not pass the minimal evaluation score. The okayset contains the okay (main class of transcripts) and okalt (alternative isoforms derived from the okay dataset).     
Reference output:
- *trclass (file in the main dir)
- *trclass.sum.txt (file in the main dir)
- Fasta headers (okay and okalt)

Parsing Evidential Gene output for Maker:
- okay
- okalt
- Complete transcripts only (more stricht thresholding if necessary)
Parse completeness from the *trclass file or directly from the fasta headers. Select the transcripts with "complete" label.     

## Proteins 
High quality proteins from Protein Data Bank. Do not include any protein predictions since those may generate "false" evidence.         

## 2. Repeat masking and selection of contigs

- Customized repeat library when available, predicting specific type of repeat elements (ex: LTR in spruce). Includes also standard repeat libraries from RepBase.    
- Genome assembly with contigs >= 1Kbp

Divide genome assembly in batches if genome assembly is large. The ```src``` direcory contains a set of scripts to start jobs on numbers. start-sbatch uses a list a files (batches) that are masked with RepeatMasker.    

After RepeatMasker use ```CalculatedMasked.sh``` to calculate the repeats and gaps bp in each contig. Input and output examples are in the same directory.      
This script uses the **gff** files from RepeatMasker to mask the contigs. In this case every type of repeat is included in the anlysis, both partial and complete.         

Select the contigs that contain at least the average CDS length characteristic of the species (or related species). For example, we've decided to use 1Kbp in spruce since the average CDS length in Arabidopsis which is the closest know plant species.      

## 3. Contigs selection based on gene completeness

Select the contigs containing at least one complete gene. This can be achieved by running GMAP and select high identity and coverage.           
The evidence EST in step-1 can be used to select the contigs: the optimal scenario is to have several RNAseq dataset fro different experiments and/or tissues.    

In case you want to use different that the organism of origin RNAseq datasets (but still closely related), you may lower the identity in GMAP. The selection was tested with identity 50%. The outcome for the contigs selection was 15% different than the default identity run (95% identity).         

Please note that the search of contigs containing complete genes through GMAP does not guarantee the alignment to all the contigs (indexing and mapping resolution). A previous BLASTn test showed that the number of selected contigs significantly higher at the same thresholds for identity and coverage. Consider that GMAP is optimized for spliced alignemnt while BLASTn not. BLASTn recruits more contigs but the alignemnts are not always of high quality. A small percentage of high quality genes/alignemnts is however lost by the lower granularity of the GMAP alignments.         

## Other tools

[Kent Utils](https://github.com/ENCODE-DCC/kentUtils/tree/master/src/utils) - UCSC             
*faSplit* - To be used only on small files! DO NOT use the command on large file, >= 10Gbp. Bugged version on Git: 997671e on Aug 5, 2013. Splits files into batches           
*faSomeRecords* - select or exclude fasta entries based on fasta headers in list.     
