## 4. Models training

Use the genes predicted in the first iteartion of Maker to create a model that you may use in the second and final iteration of Maker.

## Retraining Augustus - hybrid gene prediction, evidence + model

Augustus is the major gene prediction software and training is fundamental to have high quality gene predictions. In case there are no close species to the one that you are annotating you may want to retrain augustus and make customized meta-parameters. 
Re-training is about tuning the parameters in augustus/config/species/*_parameters.cfg so make shure you have the pemissions to write the file.     

You need to use a high quality EST evidence set, between 200 and 1000. Adding more genes won't add any further prediction accuracy and will slow down the retraining. You may also want to compare the predictions to other available species in augustus and check if there is an anctual improvement.      
Depending by your available evidence you may want to chose between the following approaches:        
- Usa high quality datasets, align them to the genome and curate manually the sequences. I have previously tried this approach by GMAP aigning the FL-cDNAs but this method alone was not sufficient to have high quality predictions.       
- Use previous Maker predictions and select only the high quality ones to retrain the model        

After obtaining the genemodels:
1) Remove the overlapping genes
2) Remove redundancy with tblastx using a threshold of 70% identity
3) Make sure that the majority of gene models is multiple-exons. Avid single exons since those are not really informative for parameters related to introns      
4) Avoid partial predictions, especially the ones missing START codon
In order to check your dataset you may test-run the selected genes with ```augustus/bin/etraining``` and see how many are flagged as partial or having a wrong CDS.      

There are some commands you can try in ```src/PolishTranscripts.sh```       

*IMPORTANT*    	   
Make sure you use the right species metaparameters for the training. Point to the correct file.

## Training Augustus

Re-training Augustus requires high quality genes, model	training can include a lower quality of genes. For example, use the Maker predictions with low eAED score and high coverage Q.I. values for re-training, use the ones with low eAED score only for the model training. 
Remember to train your model after you retrain the metaparameters! This step can be performed with a large amount of genes since it's fast. Check ```TrainModelAugustus.sh``` for more details.              

## SNAP - ab initio

Training SNAP is easier and straightforward. Use ```RunSnapTraining.sh``` to prepare the hmm. Those set of scripts applies a default genes selection based on eAED from the first iteration of Maker. Change the default parameters for more specific gene prediction.      

## Genemark - ab initio
 
Training of Genemark is explained in the ```RunGeneMark.sh```


### Maker runs
Use this training step to prepare the final gene prediction models. The Maker ctrl files for the first iteration are in the ```src``` directory.       
In order to speed up the prediction, divide the contigs data set in batches that contain at maximum 1000 contigs each.

### 5. First step Maker

## BLAST parameters

Use higher thresholds for BLAST alignmets, this will allow a higher quality model      
- BLASTn - pcov and pid 0.95
- BLASTn - pcov 0.7 and pid 0.6
- tBLASTn - pcov and pid 0.95

## Maker run options

Use ```est2genome=1``` and ```protein2genome=1``` for this first iteartion. This will allow to use pure gene alignments as final gene models. Do not use those options for the final predictions.      
Allow splicing with ```alt_splice=1``` for all the runs     
You can use a preliminary set of gene models, maybe from draft Maker runs. Those will be refined through the first pass of MAKER.    

### 6. Second step Maker

### BLAST parameter

Default       

### Maker run options

Remeber to set back ```est2genome``` and ```protein2genome``` to 0.     
Add the final models of Augustus, Snap and Genemark.     
